ResearchGate

What is (Schrédinger's) Negentropy?

Article - January 2010

Mae-Wan Ho
The Institute of Science in Society

All content following this page was uploaded by Mae-Wan Ho on 02 May 2014.

Institute of Science in Society

Science
Society

Sustainability

Xenotransplantation - How Bad Science and Big Business Put the World at Risk
from Viral Pandemics

The Organic Revolution in Science and Implications for Science and Spirituality
Use and Abuse of the Precautionary Principle

i-sis news #5

Modern Trends in BioThermoKinetics 3, 50-61, 1994.

What is (Schrodinger’s) Negentropy?

Mae-Wan Ho

Bioelectrodynamics Laboratory, Open University
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, U.K.

Abstract
Is It Free Energy?
Is It Maxwell’s Demon?
Is It Organization?
Is It Stored Energy?
Stored Energy versus Free Energy
Towards a Thermodynamics of Organized Complexity
1. Coupled cycles
. Dissipative structures are coupled cycles

2
3. Dissipative structures are coherent structures
4

. Coupled cycles, space-time structure,
energy storage and coherence

5. The k=const. regime and the extremum state
for organized open systems

Acknowledgments
References
Abstract

I attempt to outline, qualitatively, a ‘thermodynamics of organized complexity’ based on
energy storage and mobilization in a coherent space-time structured system maintained far
from thermodynamic equilibrium by energy flow. I propose that symmetrically coupled
cycles will arise in open systems capable of energy storage, and that for such systems, the
equal population of energy over all space-time domains (the ’k = const.’ regime) is the
extremum state. This regime is characterized by the maximum of the Gibbs entropy function,
SG = -kSj pj In pj, in which the potential degrees of freedom are maximized over all
space-time domains, but it is also the state of minimum entropy because the activities in all
space-time domains are effectively coupled to a single actual degree of freedom.

Key words ‘Negentropy’, living organization, space-time structure, stored energy, coherence, coupled cycles,
thermodynamics of organized complexity.

References
1. E. Schrédinger What is Life ? Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1944.
2. L. Brillouin, L. Science and Information Theory, 2nd ed., Academic Press, New York, 1962.
